# SOLUTION SECTION

## Introduction

The SOLUTION section defines the initial conditions for the model, that is the conditions at time zero, before any flow occurs in the reservoir. As such, sufficient information from the previous sections is required for the simulator to calculate the initial saturation and pressure distributions through out the model, such that the fluids are in gravity/hydrostatic equilibrium. This means that if the simulator is run for a period of time without any production or injection then there should be no saturation or pressure changes in the model. In fact this "test" of running the simulator for a few years without any production or injection should always be performed to ensure that the model is indeed in hydrostatic equilibrium.

There are basically three methods to initialize a model:

3)  1)  1)  **Equilibrium** Initialization: This is the primary method to initialize a model, and is in fact, the only manner that should be used to set the model at equilibrium conditions, unless a restart run is being initialized. Here, OPM Flow uses the previously entered PVT data and the fluid saturation tables (SWFN, SGFN, etc.), combined with the EQUIL keyword in the SOLUTION section to compute the capillary and fluid pressure gradients, and hence the fluid saturations and fluid densities in each cell. The EQUIL keyword basically sets the pressure at a datum depth together with fluid contacts for an equilibrium region, from which all the required grid block properties can be calculated. Note that it is not uncommon for hydrostatic equilibrium not be be achieved initially, for example due to different PVT regions being in communication, aquifer properties incorrectly defined, etc. Which is why it is important to run the simulator for a few years without any production or injection to ensure that the model is indeed in hydrostatic equilibrium, and to rectify any issues.

        2)  **Enumeration** Initialization: This is the option where one defines the pressures for all the grid cells together with the cells initial gas and water saturations, the oil saturation in this case is back calculated by the simulator using . Thus, in three phase runs only two phase saturations need to be entered and for two phase runs only one saturation array needs to be provided. This type of initialization is rarely used in the industry due to the complexity of ensuring that the model is in gravity equilibrium; however, the facility has been used by some companies in the past, using in-house proprietary software, to generate suitable input to the simulator. Enumeration of course can also be used to initialize the model in non-equilibrium state, similar to the restart initialization described next.

        3)  **Restart** Initialization: This is a form of enumeration initialization but in this case the condition of gravity equilibrium is not applied; in other words the model is initialized at a point in time when after the model has produced or injected fluids. This type of initialization is very common, as it enables the run to "restart" from a previously run case. For example, once a model has been history matched, all the prediction cases can be "restarted" from the end of the final history match run, as oppose to running the cases from the start of the history match to the end of the predication cases. In some fields, the reservoir may not be in hydrostatic equilibrium, for example, due to a pressure differential across the field caused by a re-charging aquifer. In these rare cases the model is initialized using the hydrostatic equilibrium approach but then run until the present day conditions match the measured present day conditions by adjusting the aquifer influx. The actual history match/prediction runs are then restarted from the resulting present day restart file.

Equilibrium Initialization uses the PVT data and saturation tables entered in the PROPS section combined with data entered on the EQUIL keyword in the SOLUTION section. As capillary forces are generally small relative to viscous forces in field scale simulations, one may expect the errors introduced by use of the drainage capillary pressure curves to simulate an imbibition process to be small. Thus, it is common practice in field scale simulations to use the capillary pressure drainage curves in initializing a model, mainly as drainage curves are routinely measured in the laboratory, whereas imbibition curve are not. The exception of course is when hysteresis is applicable or when simulating small scale systems. If the hysteresis option has been activated via HYSTER variable on the SATOPTS keyword in the RUNSPEC section, then the simulator will use the appropriate imbibition capillary pressure data entered via the saturation table keywords (SWFN, SGFN, etc.) in determining the fluid saturation.

The initial vertical distribution of fluids will be governed by the fluid densities and capillary forces, with a gas zone, a gas-oil transition zone, an oil zone, an oil-water transition zone, and finally the water zone within a hydrostatic unit or region. Not all zones may be present in a hydrostatic unit, for example in dry gas reservoirs there will be only gas, gas-water transition, and water zones. This is fundamental to construct given the density of the in situ phases. However, there are rare exceptions to this principle. When there is an exception, the more likely explanation is the various fluids are not in the same hydrostatic unit.

In the methodology outline below, it has been assumed that the initial oil pressure has been specified at some depth, z~init~ within the oil zone. Note it is not necessary that the pressure is specified within the oil zone, but it makes describing the analysis somewhat simpler. Thus we have:

The oil pressure at any other point in the oil column can be calculated as shown below:

where ɣ^oil^ is the oil pressure gradient and z is the given depth. We can then calculate the oil pressure at the Water-Oil Contact ("WOC"), that is p^oil^ ~woc~ from:

Employing the definition of water-oil capillary pressure, one can write an expression for the water pressure at the water-oil contact:

The water pressure at any other point in the reservoir can now be related to the water pressure at the water-oil contact as shown below:

where ɣ^water^ is the water pressure gradient and z is the given depth.

Similarly, for gas we have the oil phase pressure at the Gas-Oil Contact ("GOC").

Again, we can use gas-oil capillary pressure to obtain the gas phase pressure at the GOC, that is p^gas^ ~goc~ :

and the gas phase pressure at any point in the reservoir is therefore determined from:

where ɣ^gas^ is the gas pressure gradient.

Having calculated the phase pressures at all depths in the reservoir (all grid block cells in the model), we can then calculate the capillary pressures, as the difference between the oil and water pressures, and the oil and gas pressures, depending on the phases present, that is:

Under the assumption that the reservoir is initially at capillary equilibrium, we now calculate the average water saturation for each grid block in the computational grid on the basis of the capillary pressure at the center of that grid block.

The calculation of initial gas saturations is exactly analogous to the above treatment of water saturations.

Note also that fluid saturations in a grid block should sum to one, that is, .

With grid blocks of sufficiently small size, the procedure described above will yield accurate saturation distributions for the static equilibrium situation. Unfortunately, in practice we are often forced to used grid blocks that are much larger than we would like because of computer time and storage considerations. One of the results of using such large blocks is that the saturation distributions and hence the oil- and gas-in-place volumes can sometimes be substantially in error.

This is easily demonstrated by imagining a case where the water-oil contact lies infinitesimally above the center of a 20-foot thick grid block. In this case, the procedure described above would cause the water saturation to be calculated as 1.0, whereas in actual fact it should be very nearly 0.5 (1.0 + Swc). Hence, we would make an error approaching half the pore volume of the grid block in the oil and water in-place in that block. To overcome this we can sub-divide each grid block in the vertical direction, and calculate the saturations for the sub-blocks, with the number of sub-blocks defined via the EQLOPT3 option on the EQLNUM keyword. The simulator can then sum the sub-blocks to obtain the average grid block saturation and thus obtain a more accurate estimate of the volumes in-place. Note this is less of a concern these days due to fact that most models now use 0.5 to 1.0 metres (one to three feet) in the vertical resolution due to the improvement in computer efficiency.

There are variations to the above general methodology depending on the data entered, for example:

3)  1)  1)  If the SWATINIT array, that stipulates the initial water saturation for each cell, has been entered in the PROPS section then the capillary pressure data entered on the saturation tables are re-scaled to honor the SWATINIT array whenever possible, and the re-scaled capillary pressure data are used in the equilibrium initialization calculations. Thus, each cell will have its own scaling of the capillary pressure that needs to be taken into account during the simulation.

        2)  For reservoirs with both oil and dissolved gas phases (OIL and DISGAS keywords in the RUNSPEC section), the dissolved gas ratio, Rs, or the saturation pressure Pb, may also be entered as a function of depth. See the RSVD and PBVD keywords in the SOLUTION section. If neither of these keywords have been entered then Rs is set to equal to the Rs value at the GOC. This also means that the datum depth on the EQUIL keyword in the SOLUTION section, must equal the GOC depth, in order for the saturated Rs to be calculated from the datum pressure and the associated PVT table.

        3)  Similarly, for reservoirs with both wet gas and vaporized oil (GAS and VAPOIL keywords in the RUNSPEC section), the dissolved vaporized oil (more commonly referred to as condensate) gas ratio, Rv, or the dew-point pressure Pd, may also be entered as a function of depth. See the RVVD and PDVD keywords in the SOLUTION section. If neither of these keywords have been entered then Rv is set to equal to the Rv value at the GOC. Again, this also means that the datum depth must set to the GOC depth in order for the saturated Rv to be calculated from the datum pressure and the associated PVT table.

In OPM Flow[^1] initial conditions are calculated in a similar manner by using the pressure at a reference depth, the depths of the water-oil and oil-gas contacts, and the capillary pressures at those contact depths. It then solves the following ordinary differential equations:

where

ρi = the oil, gas, water density,

z = the depth,

pi = the oil, gas, water pressure, and

g = the gravity term.

The equations are solved numerically using a 4^th^-order Runge-Kutta[^2]^\ ^and [^3] method, with the order of the phases decided by the location of the datum depth. First, the simulator solves for the phase in whose zone the datum is located, using the datum pressure to bind the pressure solution. Then the simulator solves for phases corresponding to the zones above and below. To tie the phase pressures, the simulator uses the already computed phase pressure(s) evaluated at the zone contact depth and the input capillary pressures.

If the initial water saturations have been specified using the SWATINIT keyword then the same approach is used for the water saturation but the capillary pressure is scaled to match the specified initial water saturation. Each cell will thus have its own scaling of the capillary pressure that needs to be taken into account during the simulations. Initial fluid properties (GOR, formation volume factors, etc.) are calculated from the cell equilibrium pressure and the entered fluid property tables, as described earlier.

## Keyword Definitions

[^1]: Rasmussen, A.F., Sandve, T.H., Bao, K., Lauser, A., Hove, J., Skaflestad, B., Klöfkorn, R., Blatt, M., Rustad, A.B., Sævareid, O. et al. \[2019\]. The Open Porous Media Flow Reservoir Simulator. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.camwa.2020.05.014.

[^2]: Runge, C. D. T. (1895), \"Über die numerische Auflösung von Differentialgleichungen\", Mathematische Annalen, Springer, 46 (2): 167--178, doi:10.1007/BF01446807.

[^3]: Kutta, M. (1901), \"Beitrag zur näherungsweisen Integration totaler Differentialgleichungen\", Zeitschrift für Mathematik und Physik, 46: 435--453.

--8<-- "chapters/sections/10/2.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/ADD.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/ADDREG.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/APIVD.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/AQANCONL.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/AQANNC.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/AQANTRC.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/AQUALIST.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/AQUANCON.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/AQUCHGAS.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/AQUCHWAT.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/AQUCON.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/AQUCT.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/AQUFET.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/AQUFETP.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/AQUFLUX.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/BC.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/BOUNDARY.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/BOX.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/COLUMNS.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/COPY.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/COPYREG.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/DATUM.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/DATUMR.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/DATUMRX.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/DEBUG.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/DYNAMICR.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/ECHO.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/END.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/ENDBOX.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/ENDDYN.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/ENDFIN.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/ENDINC.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/ENDSKIP.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/EQUALREG.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/EQUALS.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/EQUIL.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/EXTRAPMS.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/FILEUNIT.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/FORMFEED.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/GASCONC.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/GASSATC.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/GCVD.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/GETDATA.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/GETGLOB.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/GI.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/HMAQUCT.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/HMAQUFET.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/HMMLCTAQ.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/HMMLFTAQ.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/HMMLTWCN.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/HMWELCON.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/IMPORT.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/INCLUDE.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/MESSAGE.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/MESSAGES.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/MULTIPLY.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/MULTIREG.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/NOECHO.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/NOHMD.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/NOHMO.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/NOWARN.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/OILAPI.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/OPERATE.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/OPERATER.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/OUTSOL.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/PBUB.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/PBVD.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/PDEW.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/PDVD.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/PRESSURE.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/PRVD.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/PYEND.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/PYINPUT.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RAINFALL.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RBEDCONT.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/REFINE.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RESTART.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RIVERSYS.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RPTRST.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RPTSOL.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RS.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RSVD.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RSW.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RTEMP.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RTEMPA.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RTEMPVD.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RV.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RVVD.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RVW.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/RVWVD.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SALT.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SALTP.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SALTPVD.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SALTREST.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SALTVD.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SBIOF.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SCALC.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SCVD.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SFOAM.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SGAS.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SKIP.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SKIP100.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SKIP300.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SMICR.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SOIL.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SOLUTION.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SOLVCONC.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SOLVFRAC.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SOXYG.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SPOLY.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SPOLYMW.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SSOL.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SUREA.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SURF.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/SWAT.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/TBLK.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/TEMPI.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/TEMPVD.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/THPRES.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/TVDP.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/VAPPARS.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/VISDATES.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/VISOPTS.md"
--8<-- "chapters/subsections/10.3/WARN.md"
