---
title: 'SCHEDULE SECTION'
source: parts/chapters/12.fodt
generated_by: scripts/python/src/fodt/fodt2md
---

# <a id="-refheading-toc1624-3043861001"></a>SCHEDULE SECTION

## <a id="-refheading-toc37634-3701168388"></a>Introduction

The [SCHEDULE](#-refheading-toc43945-784232322) section is used to specify the production and injection targets and constraints for the entire model, advance the model through time, and stipulate any other data that depends on time. For example, drilling wells at a particular time, incorporating production and/or injection rate changes as the model progresses through time, and opening and shutting wells and well connections/completions at particular times during the history of the reservoir.  Field development and operating strategy are also incorporated in the [SCHEDULE](#-refheading-toc43945-784232322) section, for example the timing and effect of upgrading of the field facilities liquid and water handling capacities. All these actions must be specified in the [SCHEDULE](#-refheading-toc43945-784232322) section at the time they occur, that is all the events in the [SCHEDULE](#-refheading-toc43945-784232322) section are time dependent. This is different to the other sections of the input deck were the order of keywords is largely unimportant; in the [SCHEDULE](#-refheading-toc43945-784232322) section it is essential because the order in which events take place in the field have to be preserved. For instance, the keyword defining wellhead locations via the [WELSPECS](#-refheading-toc268463-1366622701) keyword must precede the keyword defining the locations and properties of the well connections using the [COMPDAT](#-refheading-toc97651-3261743917) keyword. The rules on keyword order generally follow the same sequence as the order of events in a production plan, that is we drill wells first \([WELSPECS](#-refheading-toc268463-1366622701)\), then complete them \([COMPDAT](#-refheading-toc97651-3261743917)\), and put them on production \([WCONHIST](#-refheading-toc134880-2055188184), [WCONPROD](#-refheading-toc146754-4203985108), [WCONINJH](#-refheading-toc146752-4203985108), or [WCONINJE](#-refheading-toc146750-4203985108)\).
In most cases a significant part of the contents of the [SCHEDULE](#-refheading-toc43945-784232322) section is often imported from other applications. For instance, the Vertical Lift Performance \(“VLP”\) tables used to convert from Bottom\-Hole Pressure \(“BHP”\) to Tubing Head Pressure \(“THP”\) and entered via the [VFPPROD](#-refheading-toc121919-2556401936) keyword, are always generated by an external Nodal Analysis application. These tables are then included in the input deck via the [INCLUDE](#-refheading-toc55749-2479612490) keyword. Note as the VFP tables are assigned to a well via the [WCONHIST](#-refheading-toc134880-2055188184), [WCONPROD](#-refheading-toc146754-4203985108), [WCONINJH](#-refheading-toc146752-4203985108), or [WCONINJE](#-refheading-toc146750-4203985108) keywords, then the tables need to have been previously entered prior to assigning them to a well, that is the data is order dependent. Well historical production data is also normally “included” from an external source, typically the production data base, and may have to be edited to ensure that the correct connections/completions are opened and shut at the appropriate time.

| Note The term well connection is used to describe individual connections from the wellbore to a reservoir grid cell, as opposed to a well completion. A well completion is used to describe a set of connections that are “grouped” into well completions using the [COMPLUMP](#-refheading-toc97655-3261743917) keyword in the [SCHEDULE](#-refheading-toc43945-784232322) section. For instance, a well may consist of several completions with each completion consisting of multiple connections. |
| --- |

The reservoir management flexibility offered in the [SCHEDULE](#-refheading-toc43945-784232322) section is indicated by the more than 300 keywords available in the section and thus makes quality assurance of the data challenging. This means that one should not assume that the data included from third party applications are error free and therefore suitable error checking should be performed. 
The majority of the keywords are related to controlling how wells and groups are operated, by applying production/injection targets and constraints, economic criteria and associated actions if a criteria is violated, drilling of additional wells to meet production targets or constraints, as well as the relationship between the different wells and groups in the model.  In addition, the [DATES](#-refheading-toc117621-2179381650), [TIME](#-refheading-toc1252966-4250154414), and [TSTEP](#-refheading-toc118323-1596574740) keywords are used to progress the simulation through time and the [TUNING](#-refheading-toc146744-4203985108) series of keywords control the numerical parameters in defining numerical convergence of each time step. Note that OPM Flow can be instructed to read the [TUNING](#-refheading-toc146744-4203985108) keyword if the appropriate command line parameter has been activated \(see section [2.2](#22running-opm-flow-2018-10)[#2.2.Running OPM Flow 2018-10 |outline](#22running-opm-flow-2018-10)[Running OPM Flow 2023\-04 From The Command Line](#22running-opm-flow-2018-10)\).

| Note When the [DATES](#-refheading-toc117621-2179381650), [TIME](#-refheading-toc1252966-4250154414), and [TSTEP](#-refheading-toc118323-1596574740) keywords are used to advance the simulation through time, this “new” time step is known as a “report time step”, as either an action \(open a well for example\) or a report request will be made. This is different to a simulator’s automatic time step used to advance the simulator to the next “reporting time step”. For instance, if the simulation is currently at January 1, 2020 and the next reporting time step is January 1, 2021, then the simulator may not be able to advance directly in one time step to January 1, 2021. Instead, a series of time steps of various duration will be automatically selected by the simulator based on the current set of numerical convergence controls until the required “report time step” is reached. |
| --- |

The next section summarizes the data requirements for the [SCHEDULE](#-refheading-toc43945-784232322) section and offers some guidance on structuring the format of the keywords in order to increase readability of the input deck and to minimize potential input errors. 

## <a id="-refheading-toc25313-3671211675"></a>Keyword Definitions
