---
title: 'RUNSPEC SECTION'
source: parts/chapters/5.fodt
generated_by: scripts/python/src/fodt/fodt2md
---

# <a id="-refheading-toc12822-552623944"></a>RUNSPEC SECTION

## <a id="-refheading-toc457720-2734472741"></a>Introduction

This is the first section in the OPM Flow input file and defines the key parameters for the simulator including the dimensions of the model, phases present in the model \(oil, gas, and water for example\), number of tables for a given property and the maximum number of rows for each table, the maximum number of groups, wells and well completions, as well as various options to be invoked by the simulator.
The section is defined by the [RUNSPEC](#-refheading-toc55591-1778172979) keyword and is terminated by the [GRID](#-refheading-toc38674-784232322) keyword.
Keywords associated with the [RUNSPEC](#-refheading-toc55591-1778172979) section are either Activation type keywords to switch on a feature or declare a phase, or a Vector \(Row Vector\) type of keyword that declares various options or array dimensions. Examples of Vector type keywords are the [SATOPTS](#-refheading-toc37029-327352552) keyword that activates relative permeability assignment options, and the [WELLDIMS](#-refheading-toc82886-327352552) keyword that defines the maximum number of wells, completions per well, maximum number of groups, etc. for the run.  The keywords can be in any order, but the values entered impact the data the simulator expects in subsequent sections. So for example if the [VAPOIL](#-refheading-toc56610-2267116897) keyword has been invoked to declare that the vaporized oil phase \(condensate\) in wet gas63
       Natural gas that contains significant heavy hydrocarbons such as propane, butane, and other liquid hydrocarbons is known as wet gas or rich gas. is present in the run, then the simulator expects the [PVTG](#-refheading-toc104060-57619843) keyword in the [PROPS](#-refheading-toc39329-784232322) section to define the wet gas PVT properties. If the [PVDG](#-refheading-toc104056-57619843) keyword \(dry gas64
       Natural gas that occurs in the absence of condensate or liquid hydrocarbons, or gas that had condensable hydrocarbons removed, is called dry gas. It is primarily methane with some intermediates PVT data set\) has been entered instead in the [PROPS](#-refheading-toc39329-784232322) section, then the simulator will report this as an error when it reads the [PVDG](#-refheading-toc104056-57619843) keyword or after processing the [PROPS](#-refheading-toc39329-784232322) section.
Note that in some instances the numerical values entered need to be the actual values, as per the [DIMENS](#-refheading-toc20387-2267116897) keyword, or maximum values, for example the previously mentioned [WELLDIMS](#-refheading-toc82886-327352552) keyword. If the requirement for the keyword is for the actual value and an incorrect value has been entered then this may or may not be directly trapped by the simulator, and may result in numerous error message associated with the data instead. Thus, if the error reporting messages in a given section are associated with data that is required to be declared via a [RUNSPEC](#-refheading-toc55591-1778172979) keyword, one should also verify that the [RUNSPEC](#-refheading-toc55591-1778172979) keyword has been correctly defined with the associated problematic data error messages.  This is particularly true for the [TABDIMS](#-refheading-toc89327-327352552) keyword in the [RUNSPEC](#-refheading-toc55591-1778172979) section where some of the variables are defined as the actual number of tables, whereas the length of the tables are a maximum value. To be clear, if NTSFUN on the [TABDIMS](#-refheading-toc89327-327352552) keyword has been set to five, then there must be exactly five sets of relative permeability data entered in the [PROPS](#-refheading-toc39329-784232322) section, otherwise data input errors will occur.

## <a id="-refheading-toc46346-3701168388"></a>Keyword Definitions
