### VFPCHK -- Define Production Vertical Flow Performance BHP Check

| RUNSPEC | GRID | EDIT | PROPS | REGIONS | SOLUTION | SUMMARY | SCHEDULE |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

#### Description

The VFPPROD keyword defines production Vertical Flow Performance ("VFP") tables that are used to determine the outflow or downstream pressure based on the inlet or upstream pressure and the phases flowing through the system. For a well this means the table relates the flowing bottom-hole pressure ("BHP") to the well's tubing head pressure ("THP") based on the oil, gas and water rates (and any artificial lift quantities like gas lift gas), or phases ratios, flowing up the wellbore.

The VFP tables are generated by external programs and may result in some inconsistencies. A common inconsistency is that the curves of BHP versus flow rate at adjacent THP values cross, that is the BHP is increasing with decreasing THP. This will result in numerical convergence problems and should therefore be avoided; which is why the simulator checks for this particular inconsistency. However, there are cases when the external software generating the VFP table outputs "valid" high BHP values, for example, when the flow exceeds the erosion velocity limits, or the flow is supersonic, indicating a no flow condition. The VPFCHK keyword sets the BHP check pressure (VFPCHK) for subsequent VFPPROD tables, so that crossing BHP values above VFPCHK will be ignored.

This keyword is not supported by OPM Flow but would change the results if supported so the simulation will be stopped.

| No. | Name | Description | Default |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Field | Metric | Laboratory |  |
| 1 | VFPCHK | VFPCHK is a real positive value that defines the BHP pressure above which crossing VFP curves will be ignored.<br>Setting VFPCHK to a large number like the default value number will cause all crossing curves to be checked. Also if the keyword is omitted from the input deck then the check is performed using the default value. | 1.0^10^ |
| psia | barsa | atma |  |
| Notes:<br>1)  The keyword is terminated by a "/". |  |  |  |

Table 12.73: VFPCHK Keyword Description

#### Example

Here the example sets the maximum BHP to be 1.0 x10^6\ ^above which crossing VFP curves will be ignored.

\--

\-- DEFINE PRODUCTION VFP CHECK MAX BHP

\--

\-- MXBHP

VFPCHK

1.0E6

/
